tests/onehop/README.md, before:

# One-hop Tests

This suite tests the ability to retrieve given triples, which we know exist, from instances of **Translator Knowledge Provider** ("KP") under a variety of transformations, both directly, and indirectly, via instances of **Translator Autonomous Relay Agent** ("ARA").

- [How the Framework works](#how-the-testing-harness-works)
- [Configuring the Tests](#configuring-the-tests)
    - [KP Instructions](#kp-instructions)
        - [Excluding Tests](#excluding-tests)
    - [ARA Instructions](#ara-instructions)
- [Running the Tests](#running-the-tests)
    - [Running only the KP tests](#running-only-the-kp-tests)
    - [Running only the ARA tests](#running-only-the-ara-tests)

## How the Testing Harness Works

The tests are dynamically generated from sample data Subject-Predicate-Object ("S-P-O") statement triples for each KP with test data currently recorded in JSON files located within the folder `test_triples/KP`.  

The KP files contain sample data for each triple that the KP can provide.  Each triple noted therein is used to build a set of distinct types of unit tests (see the [One Hop utility module](util.py) for the specific code dynamically generating each specific TRAPI query test message within the unit test set for that triple).  The following specific unit tests are currently available:

Instances of ARA being tested are configured for testing their expected outputs using the list of KPs noted in their corresponding JSON configuration files located within `test_triples/ARA`.

For some KP resources or maybe, just specific instances of triples published by the KP, certain types of unit tests are expected to fail _a priori_ (i.e. the resource is not expected to have knowledge to answer the query). In such cases, such specific unit tests may be excluded from execution (see below).

### Biolink Model Compliance (Test Input Edges)

While being processed for inclusion into a test, every KP input S-P-O triple is screened for Biolink Model Compliance during the test setup by calling a function `check_biolink_model_compliance()` implemented in the **translator.sri.testing** package module. This method runs a series of tests against templated edge - using the currently defined Biolink Model Toolkit - capturing Biolink Model violations, in a list of returned error messages. This function is called within the `generate_trapi_kp_tests()` KP use case set up method in the **test.onehop.conftest** module. Edges with a non-zero list of error messages are so tagged as _'biolink_errors'_, which later advises the generic KP and ARA unit tests - within the PyTest run in the **tests.onehops.test_onehops** module - to formally skip the specific edge-data-template defined use case and report those errors. 

**Note:** at the moment, the Test harness reports the identical Biolink Model violation for all unit tests on the defective edge. This test output duplication is a bit verbose but tricky to avoid (some clever Testing PyTest logic - as yet unimplemented - may be needed to avoid this).

### Provenance Checking (ARA Level)

Provenance checking is attempted on the edge attributes of the TRAPI knowledge graph, by the `check_provenance()` method, called by the `test_trapi_aras` method in **tests.onehops.test_onehops** module. The `check_provenance()` method directly raises `AssertError` exceptions to report specific TRAPI message failures to document the provenance of results (as proper `knowledge_source` related attributes expected for ARA and KP annotated edge attributes of the TRAPI knowledge graph).

## Configuring the Tests

### KP Instructions

For each KP, we need a file with one triple of each type that the KP can provide.  For instance, `test_triples/KP/Test_KP/Automat_Human_GOA.json` contains the following json:

```
{
    "url": "https://automat.renci.org/ontological-hierarchy/1.2",
    "source_type": "original",
    "infores": "automat",
    "exclude_tests": ["RPBS"],
    "edges": [
        {
            "subject_category": "biolink:AnatomicalEntity",
            "object_category": "biolink:AnatomicalEntity",
            "predicate": "biolink:subclass_of",
            "subject": "UBERON:0005453",
            "object": "UBERON:0035769"
        },
        {
            "exclude_tests": ["RSE"],
            "subject_category": "biolink:CellularComponent",
            "object_category": "biolink:AnatomicalEntity",
            "predicate": "biolink:subclass_of",
            "subject": "GO:0005789",
            "object": "UBERON:0000061"
        }
    ]
}
```

The `url` tag **must** be a well-formed _resolvable_ TRAPI URL (namely, with **http://** or **https://** scheme).

For provenance testing, we need to declare the KP's infores CURIE as a value of the `infores` JSON tag (mandatory). In addition, the type of knowledge source is declared, by setting the `source_type`JSON tag, to the prefix of the knowledge source type, i.e. `"original"` for `biolink:original_knowledge_source`, `"primary"` for `biolink:primary_knowledge_source` or `"aggregator"` for `biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source`. Note that if the KP is a `biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source`, then the source_type tag-value is optional (since `"aggregator"` is the default value for a KP).

This KP provides two kinds of edges for testing: AnatomicalEntity-subclass_of->AnatomicalEntity and CellularComponent-subclass_of->AnatomicalEntity. For each of these kinds of edges, we have an entry in the file with a specific subject and object, and from these, we can create a variety of tests.

To aid KPs in creating these json files, we have generated templates in `templates/KP` using the predicates endpoint or smartAPI Registry MetaKG entries, which contains the edge types.
Note that the templates are built from KP metadata and are a good starting place, but they are not necessarily a perfect match to the desired test triples.
In particular, if a template contains an entry for two edges, where one edge can be fully calculated given the other, then there is no reason to include 
test data for the derived edge.  For instance, there is no need to include test data for an edge in one direction, and its inverse in the other direction. Here
we will be assuming (and testing) the ability of the KP to handle inverted edges whether they are specified or not.  Similarly, if a KP has
"increases_expression_of" edges, there is no need to include "affects_expression_of" in the test triples, unless there is data that is only known at the
more general level.  If, say, there are triples where all that is known is an "affects_expression_of" predicate, then that should be included.

So the steps for a KP:

1. copy a template json from `templates` into a distinctly named file in a suitable (KP-specific) subfolder location inside `test_triples/KP`
2. filter out logically derivable template entries
3. fill in the subject and object entries for each triple with a real identifiers that should be retrievable from the KP

Note: you can selectively exclude specific KP configuration files or whole subfolders of such files from execution by appending *_SKIP* to the specific file or subfolder name (see below for finer grained test exclusions).

#### Excluding Tests

Note that the above KP JSON configuration has a pair of `exclude_tests` tag values.

Each unit test type in the [One Hop utility module](util.py) is a method marked with a `TestCode` method decorator that associates each test with a 2 - 4 letter acronym.  By including the acronym in a JSON array value for an (optional) tag `exclude_tests`, one or more test types from execution using that triple. 

A test exclusion tag (`exclude_tests`) may be placed at the top level of a KP file JSON configuration and/or within any of its triple entries, as noted in the above data KP template example. In the above example, the unit test corresponding to the "RPBS" test type ("_raise_predicate_by_subject_") is not run for any of the triples of the file, whereas the test type "RSE" ("_raise_subject_entity_") is only excluded for the one specific triple where it is specified. Note that test exclusion for a given triple is the union set of all test exclusions. A table summarizing the test codes for currently available tests (as of April 2022) is provided here for convenience (see the util.py file for more details):

| Test Name                  | Test Code |
|----------------------------|:---------:|
| by subject                 |    BS     |
| inverse by new subject     |   IBNS    |
| by object                  |    BO     |
| raise subject entity       |    RSE    |
| raise object by subject    |   ROBS    |
| raise predicate by subject |   RPBS    |

### ARA Instructions

For each ARA, we want to ensure that it is able to extract information correctly from the KPs.  To do this, we need to know which KPs each ARA interacts with.  We have generated template ARA json files under `templates/ARA` that contains annotations linking the ARA to all KPs.  For instance (under _tests/onehop/test_triples/ARA/Test_ARA/ARAGORN.json_):

```
{
    "url": "https://aragorn.renci.org/1.2",
    "infores": "aragorn",   
    "KPs": [
        "Automat Panther",
        "Automat Ontological Hierarchy"
    ]
}
```
Once again, the `url` tag **must** be a well-formed _resolvable_ TRAPI URL (namely, with **http://** or **https://** scheme).

The `infores` given is mandatory and is the 'object identifier' of InfoRes CURIE referring to the ARA itself.

In order to correctly link ARAs to KPs, ARAs will need to:

1. Copy the ARA template from `templates` into a distinctly named file, in a suitable (ARA-specific) subfolder location inside `test_triples/ARA`
2. Edit the copied file to remove KPs that the ARA does not access.

Note: as with the KP template files, you can selectively exclude complete ARA test files or whole subfolders of such files from execution, by appending *_SKIP* to the specific file or subfolder name. 

ARA test templates do not explicitly show the edges to be be tested, but rather, inherit the test data of their dereferenced KP's.  Once again, an infores tag value should be specified, in this case, for the ARA. However, all ARA's are expected to be `biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source` types of knowledge sources, hence, no `source_type` tag is needed (nor expected) here; however, they are checked for proper `'biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source': '<ARA infores CURIE>'` provenance declarations of their TRAPI knowledge graph edge attributes.



## Running the Tests

Tests are implemented with pytest.  To run all tests, simply run:

```
pytest test_onehops.py
```

But this takes quite some time, so frequently you will want to limit the tests run.

### Running only the KP tests

To run only KP tests:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps
```

To run KP Tests, but only using one triple from each KP:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --one
```

To restrict test triples to one accessed from "REGISTRY" (the default value), that is, KP test data files retrieved from the 'test_data_location' URL defined in the KP records in the Translator SmartAPI Registry Translatorthose from a given directory or file:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --triple_source=<triple_source>
```
e.g.
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --triple_source=test_triples/KP/Ranking_Agent
```
or
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --triple_source=test_triples/KP/Ranking_Agent/Automat_CTD.json
```

The full set of available command line options may be viewed using the help function:


```shell
pytest tests/onehop/test_onehops.py --help
```

These include the following Testing-specific custom options:

```
  --teststyle=TESTSTYLE
                        Which Test to Run?
  --one                 Only use first edge from each KP file
  --triple_source=TRIPLE_SOURCE
                        'REGISTRY', directory or file from which to retrieve triples.
                        (Default: 'REGISTRY', which triggers the use of metadata, in KP entries
                        from the Translator SmartAPI Registry, to configure the tests).
  --ARA_source=ARA_SOURCE
                        'REGISTRY', directory or file from which to retrieve ARA Config.
                        (Default: 'REGISTRY', which triggers the use of metadata, in ARA entries
                        from the Translator SmartAPI Registry, to configure the tests).
  --TRAPI_Version=TRAPI_VERSION
                        TRAPI API Version to use for the tests 
                        (Default: latest public release or REGISTRY metadata value).
  --Biolink_Version=BIOLINK_VERSION
                        Biolink Model Version to use for the tests
                        (Default: latest Biolink Model Toolkit default or REGISTRY metadata value).
```

### Running only the ARA tests

To run only ARA tests (testing all ARAs for all KPs)
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_aras
```

Options for restricting test triples for KPs also work for ARAs.  To test a single triple from the Automat CTD against all ARAs that use that KP:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_aras --one --triple_source=test_triples/KP/Ranking_Agent/Automat_CTD.json
```

The ARAs can also be restricted to a particular json or directory, e.g.

```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_aras --one --triple_source=test_triples/KP/Ranking_Agent/Automat_CTD.json --ARA_source=test_triples/ARA/Ranking_Agent/Strider.json
```

Commit message:

Another iteration on the developing a background worker process for SRI Testing web services

tests/onehop/README.md, after:

# One-hop Tests

This suite tests the ability to retrieve given triples, which we know exist, from instances of **Translator Knowledge Provider** ("KP") under a variety of transformations, both directly, and indirectly, via instances of **Translator Autonomous Relay Agent** ("ARA").

- [How the Framework works](#how-the-testing-harness-works)
- [Configuring the Tests](#configuring-the-tests)
    - [KP Instructions](#kp-instructions)
        - [Excluding Tests](#excluding-tests)
    - [ARA Instructions](#ara-instructions)
- [Running the Tests](#running-the-tests)
    - [Running only the KP tests](#running-only-the-kp-tests)
    - [Running only the ARA tests](#running-only-the-ara-tests)

## How the Testing Harness Works

The tests are dynamically generated from sample data Subject-Predicate-Object ("S-P-O") statement triples for each KP with test data currently recorded in JSON files located within the folder `test_triples/KP`.  

The KP files contain sample data for each triple that the KP can provide.  Each triple noted therein is used to build a set of distinct types of unit tests (see the [One Hop utility module](util.py) for the specific code dynamically generating each specific TRAPI query test message within the unit test set for that triple).  The following specific unit tests are currently available:

Instances of ARA being tested are configured for testing their expected outputs using the list of KPs noted in their corresponding JSON configuration files located within `test_triples/ARA`.

For some KP resources or maybe, just specific instances of triples published by the KP, certain types of unit tests are expected to fail _a priori_ (i.e. the resource is not expected to have knowledge to answer the query). In such cases, such specific unit tests may be excluded from execution (see below).

### Biolink Model Compliance (Test Input Edges)

While being processed for inclusion into a test, every KP input S-P-O triple is screened for Biolink Model Compliance during the test setup by calling a function `check_biolink_model_compliance()` implemented in the **translator.sri.testing** package module. This method runs a series of tests against templated edge - using the currently defined Biolink Model Toolkit - capturing Biolink Model violations, in a list of returned error messages. This function is called within the `generate_trapi_kp_tests()` KP use case set up method in the **test.onehop.conftest** module. Edges with a non-zero list of error messages are so tagged as _'biolink_errors'_, which later advises the generic KP and ARA unit tests - within the PyTest run in the **tests.onehops.test_onehops** module - to formally skip the specific edge-data-template defined use case and report those errors. 

**Note:** at the moment, the Test harness reports the identical Biolink Model violation for all unit tests on the defective edge. This test output duplication is a bit verbose but tricky to avoid (some clever Testing PyTest logic - as yet unimplemented - may be needed to avoid this).

### Provenance Checking (ARA Level)

Provenance checking is attempted on the edge attributes of the TRAPI knowledge graph, by the `check_provenance()` method, called by the `test_trapi_aras` method in **tests.onehops.test_onehops** module. The `check_provenance()` method directly raises `AssertError` exceptions to report specific TRAPI message failures to document the provenance of results (as proper `knowledge_source` related attributes expected for ARA and KP annotated edge attributes of the TRAPI knowledge graph).

## Configuring the Tests

### KP Instructions

For each KP, we need a file with one triple of each type that the KP can provide.  For instance, `test_triples/KP/Test_KP/Automat_Human_GOA.json` contains the following json:

```
{
    "url": "https://automat.renci.org/ontological-hierarchy/1.2",
    "source_type": "original",
    "infores": "automat",
    "exclude_tests": ["RPBS"],
    "edges": [
        {
            "subject_category": "biolink:AnatomicalEntity",
            "object_category": "biolink:AnatomicalEntity",
            "predicate": "biolink:subclass_of",
            "subject": "UBERON:0005453",
            "object": "UBERON:0035769"
        },
        {
            "exclude_tests": ["RSE"],
            "subject_category": "biolink:CellularComponent",
            "object_category": "biolink:AnatomicalEntity",
            "predicate": "biolink:subclass_of",
            "subject": "GO:0005789",
            "object": "UBERON:0000061"
        }
    ]
}
```

The `url` tag **must** be a well-formed _resolvable_ TRAPI URL (namely, with **http://** or **https://** scheme).

For provenance testing, we need to declare the KP's infores CURIE as a value of the `infores` JSON tag (mandatory). In addition, the type of knowledge source is declared, by setting the `source_type`JSON tag, to the prefix of the knowledge source type, i.e. `"original"` for `biolink:original_knowledge_source`, `"primary"` for `biolink:primary_knowledge_source` or `"aggregator"` for `biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source`. Note that if the KP is a `biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source`, then the source_type tag-value is optional (since `"aggregator"` is the default value for a KP).

This KP provides two kinds of edges for testing: AnatomicalEntity-subclass_of->AnatomicalEntity and CellularComponent-subclass_of->AnatomicalEntity. For each of these kinds of edges, we have an entry in the file with a specific subject and object, and from these, we can create a variety of tests.

To aid KPs in creating these json files, we have generated templates in `templates/KP` using the predicates endpoint or smartAPI Registry MetaKG entries, which contains the edge types.
Note that the templates are built from KP metadata and are a good starting place, but they are not necessarily a perfect match to the desired test triples.
In particular, if a template contains an entry for two edges, where one edge can be fully calculated given the other, then there is no reason to include 
test data for the derived edge.  For instance, there is no need to include test data for an edge in one direction, and its inverse in the other direction. Here
we will be assuming (and testing) the ability of the KP to handle inverted edges whether they are specified or not.  Similarly, if a KP has
"increases_expression_of" edges, there is no need to include "affects_expression_of" in the test triples, unless there is data that is only known at the
more general level.  If, say, there are triples where all that is known is an "affects_expression_of" predicate, then that should be included.

So the steps for a KP:

1. copy a template json from `templates` into a distinctly named file in a suitable (KP-specific) subfolder location inside `test_triples/KP`
2. filter out logically derivable template entries
3. fill in the subject and object entries for each triple with a real identifiers that should be retrievable from the KP

Note: you can selectively exclude specific KP configuration files or whole subfolders of such files from execution by appending *_SKIP* to the specific file or subfolder name (see below for finer grained test exclusions).

#### Excluding Tests

Note that the above KP JSON configuration has a pair of `exclude_tests` tag values.

Each unit test type in the [One Hop utility module](util.py) is a method marked with a `TestCode` method decorator that associates each test with a 2 - 4 letter acronym.  By including the acronym in a JSON array value for an (optional) tag `exclude_tests`, one or more test types from execution using that triple. 

A test exclusion tag (`exclude_tests`) may be placed at the top level of a KP file JSON configuration and/or within any of its triple entries, as noted in the above data KP template example. In the above example, the unit test corresponding to the "RPBS" test type ("_raise_predicate_by_subject_") is not run for any of the triples of the file, whereas the test type "RSE" ("_raise_subject_entity_") is only excluded for the one specific triple where it is specified. Note that test exclusion for a given triple is the union set of all test exclusions. A table summarizing the test codes for currently available tests (as of April 2022) is provided here for convenience (see the util.py file for more details):

| Test Name                  | Test Code |
|----------------------------|:---------:|
| by subject                 |    BS     |
| inverse by new subject     |   IBNS    |
| by object                  |    BO     |
| raise subject entity       |    RSE    |
| raise object by subject    |   ROBS    |
| raise predicate by subject |   RPBS    |

### ARA Instructions

For each ARA, we want to ensure that it is able to extract information correctly from the KPs.  To do this, we need to know which KPs each ARA interacts with.  We have generated template ARA json files under `templates/ARA` that contains annotations linking the ARA to all KPs.  For instance (under _tests/onehop/test_triples/ARA/Test_ARA/ARAGORN.json_):

```
{
    "url": "https://aragorn.renci.org/1.2",
    "infores": "aragorn",   
    "KPs": [
        "Automat Panther",
        "Automat Ontological Hierarchy"
    ]
}
```
Once again, the `url` tag **must** be a well-formed _resolvable_ TRAPI URL (namely, with **http://** or **https://** scheme).

The `infores` given is mandatory and is the 'object identifier' of InfoRes CURIE referring to the ARA itself.

In order to correctly link ARAs to KPs, ARAs will need to:

1. Copy the ARA template from `templates` into a distinctly named file, in a suitable (ARA-specific) subfolder location inside `test_triples/ARA`
2. Edit the copied file to remove KPs that the ARA does not access.

Note: as with the KP template files, you can selectively exclude complete ARA test files or whole subfolders of such files from execution, by appending *_SKIP* to the specific file or subfolder name. 

ARA test templates do not explicitly show the edges to be be tested, but rather, inherit the test data of their dereferenced KP's.  Once again, an infores tag value should be specified, in this case, for the ARA. However, all ARA's are expected to be `biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source` types of knowledge sources, hence, no `source_type` tag is needed (nor expected) here; however, they are checked for proper `'biolink:aggregator_knowledge_source': '<ARA infores CURIE>'` provenance declarations of their TRAPI knowledge graph edge attributes.


## Running the Tests

Tests are implemented with pytest.  To run all tests, from _within_ the `tests/onehop` project subdirectory, simply run:

```
pytest test_onehops.py
```

But this likely takes quite some time, so frequently you will want to limit the tests run.

### Running only the KP tests

To run only KP tests:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps
```

To run KP Tests, but only using one triple from each KP:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --one
```

To restrict test triples to one accessed from "REGISTRY" (the default value), that is, KP test data files retrieved from the 'test_data_location' URL defined in the KP records in the Translator SmartAPI Registry Translatorthose from a given directory or file:
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --triple_source=<triple_source>
```
e.g.
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --triple_source=test_triples/KP/Unit_Test_KP
```
or
```
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --triple_source=test_triples/KP/Unit_Test_KP/Test_KP.json
```

The tests may be globally constrained to validate against a specified TRAPI and/or Biolink Version, as follows:

```shell
pytest test_onehops.py::test_trapi_kps --TRAPI_Version ="1.2" --Biolink_Version="2.2.0"
```

The full set of available command line options may be viewed using the help function:


```shell
pytest test_onehops.py --help
```

These include the following Testing-specific custom options:

```
  --teststyle=TESTSTYLE
                        Which Test to Run?
  --one                 Only use first edge from each KP file
  --triple_source=TRIPLE_SOURCE
                        'REGISTRY', directory or file from which to retrieve triples.
                        (Default: 'REGISTRY', which triggers the use of metadata, in KP entries
                        from the Translator SmartAPI Registry, to configure the tests).
  --ARA_source=ARA_SOURCE
                        'REGISTRY', directory or file from which to retrieve ARA Config.
                        (Default: 'REGISTRY', which triggers the use of metadata, in ARA entries
                        from the Translator SmartAPI Registry, to configure the tests).
  --TRAPI_Version=TRAPI_VERSION
                        TRAPI API Version to use for the tests 
                        (Default: latest public release or REGISTRY metadata value).
  --Biolink_Version=BIOLINK_VERSION
                        Biolink Model Version to use for the tests
                        (Default: latest Biolink Model Toolkit default or REGISTRY metadata value).
```

### Running only the ARA tests

The ARA tests cannot generally be run in isolation of the above KP tests (given their dependency on the generation of the KP test cases).
